# Chapter 2: Descriptive Statistic

The quick calculation can be technically correct and yet totally wrong in terms of the question I set out for answer. An example for this is the average income in America is not equal to the income of the average American because average income can go up without helping the average American.

Descriptive statistics give us a manageable and meaningful summary of the underlying phenomenon yet any simplification invites abuse. 

The mean is prone to distortion by outliers. For instance, the average income of Bill Gates and other 10 middle class people is 91 million. This statement is statistically correct and grossly misleading because of the sensitivity of the mean to outliers. In this case, the median will be a better choice, which is the point that divides a distribution in half and half of the observations lie above the median and half lie below. (The median is an even number of observations, the median is the midpoint between the two middle observations.) The income of the sixth guy will represent the median income for the group. For distributions without serious outliers, the median and the mean will be similar. if the distribution is nearly symmetrical, the mean and median are relatively close to one another. If the distribution is slightly skewed to the right and the outliers move the mean slightly rightward but has no impact on the median. Similarly for distribution that is slightly skewed to the left. In other words, the outliers will inflate the mean but not the median. 

Neither the median nor the mean is hard to calculate; the key is determining which measure of the "middle" is more accurate in a particular situation (a phenomenon that is easily exploited). The distribution can be divided into quarters, or quartiles. The first quartile consists of the bottom 25 percent of the observations; the second quartile consists of the next 25 percent of the observations; and so on. The distribution can also be divided into deciles, each with 10 percent of the observations. The distribution can be divided into hundredths, or percentiles. Each percentile represents the bottom 1 percent of the distribution and 99th percentile represents the top 1 percent of the distribution. These kinds of descriptive statistics describe where a particular observation lies compared with everyone else. Otherwise, the absolute figures can be interpreted without any context or additional information. For example, if I received 85 percent in the test, I do not have any idea how others do but I place first in the test, that is a relative statistic. Most standardized tests produces results that have meaning only as a relative statistic. 

Another statistic that can help us describe what might otherwise be a jumble of numbers is the standard deviation, which is a measure of how dispersed the data are from their mean. For instance, the mean and median of weight of XC athletes and the University of Waterloo students are both 155 pounds. But the University of Waterloo students have far more dispersion around the midpoint, meaning that their weights are spread farther from the midpoint. The XC athletes look like they all weigh the same amount, while the University of Waterloo students have some tiny people and some bizarrely large people. The weights of the University of Waterloo students are "more spread out," which is an important attribute when it comes to describing the weights of these two groups. The distribution of the weights of the University of Waterloo students is more dispersed than the distribution of weights of XC athletes. Hence, the standard deviation of the weights of the University of Waterloo students will be higher than the standard deviation of weights of the XC runners. A frequency distribution with the weights of the University of Waterloo students would literally be fatter (more spread out) than a frequency distribution of XC runners.

A high proportion of the observations lie within one standard standard deviation of the mean (meaning that they are in the range from one standard deviation below the mean to one standard deviation above the mean). Far fewer observations lie two standard deviations from the mean, and fewer still lie three or four standard deviations away. When we know the mean and standard deviation of any collection of data, we have some series intellectual traction. For normal distributions, the proportion of the observations lie within one standard deviation of the mean (68.2 percent), within two standard deviations of the mean (95.4 percent), within three standard deviations (99.7 percent), and so on.

A percentage change always give the value of some figure relative to something else. A rate are expressed in percentages, which are levied against some quantity and can go up or down. For instance, when the tax raised from 2 percent to 3 percent, it can be pointed out as an increase of 1 percentage point (absolute change) or an increase of 50 percentage point (relative change).

There are countless ways to compute an index, which consolidates lots of complex information into a single number and each has the potential to produce a different outcome. Any index is highly sensitive to the descriptive statistics that are cobbled together to build it, and the weight given to each of these components. As a result, indices range from useful but imperfect tools to complete charades. The ranking of best cities to live is based on a lot of factors such as real estate price and environment, the top 5 cities like Burlington and Oakville can change when the weight of each component changes, but there is no way Scarborough has a higher ranking than Oakville.